[Music]
so
why is
movement specifically so important to
mental well-being i almost don't even
know where to begin with this i mean you
can start with the data if you just look
at the data around the world every
country you can imagine that it has been
studied in every age group every health
status every gender every socio-economic
status people who are more physically
active are happier they have better
relationships they have more meaning in
life they're less at risk for things
like depression and loneliness if you go
further than just sort of that kind of
epidemiology and you look at how
movement affects the brain and how
movement affects mental health
it's as if humans were born to move and
when we are physically active it puts us
in a state of not just body but of mind
to be the best version of ourselves you
know everything from the neurochemistry
of the runner's high which makes us
enjoy cooperating with other people more
and gives us hope and optimism
all the way to how if you are regularly
active you have a different brain and
nervous system than people who don't
exercise you have a brain and a nervous
system that are more sensitive to
pleasure and more resilient to stress i
could literally just talk for the next
hour listing the many ways but i think
that the biggest takeaway is that
that human beings as individuals and as
a species we thrive when we are active
that that our brains
aren't just housed in bodies like it's a
suitcase that's carrying our brains
around our brains really work best when
we are in bodies that are active
[Music]
hey everybody welcome to impact theory
today's guest is a research psychologist
a lecturer at stanford and an
award-winning science writer she's also
a best-selling author of a number of
books including the willpower instinct
and the upside of stress and her ted
talk titled how to make stress your
friend is one of the 20 most viewed ted
talks of all time her powerful insights
into the field of science help which
focuses on translating insights from
psychology and neuroscience into
practical strategies that support health
and well-being has made her a much
sought-after speaker and consultant
she's worked with countless
organizations including the new york
times education initiative and she's
appeared on such prestigious television
shows as the today show good morning
america the anderson cooper show and
cnn's vital signs so please help me in
welcoming the woman whose incredible
work has been published in 28 languages
around the world
jazzercise aficionado and author of the
joy of movement kelly mcgonagall phd
thank you absolutely welcome to the show
thanks for having me so
i didn't know anything about this the
movement side of your life i had been
introduced obviously to you through the
ted talk and all the cool stuff that
you've done around stress which was
really interesting i'm a total
psychopath for willpower so i was like
all right what's the next book going to
be
and it was a curveball for me but then
like the way you tie it together with
all the connection and stuff what made
you want to write about the power of
movement i this is the book i was born
to write it's funny because most people
who know me as a public figure don't
know that this is actually the most
important part of my life
i discovered exercise as a way to take
care of my mental health when i was very
young like seven or eight and i've been
teaching group exercise classes for 20
years and i'm convinced it is the most
important thing i do to take care of
myself and i also think it's the most
important contribution that i make to my
community the classes that i lead so i
you know every book that i've written so
far it's because somebody else asked me
to you know like oh you teach this class
on the science of willpower it should be
a book or you gave this ted talk it
should be a book and this was the book
where i said this is the book that i
want to write because i believe the
single most important thing that other
people can do as well to to take care of
their minds and also build community
so
why is
movement specifically so important to
mental well-being i almost don't even
know where to begin with this i mean you
can start with the data if you just look
at the data around the world every
country you can imagine that it has been
studied in every age group every health
status every gender every socioeconomic
status people who are more physically
active are happier they have better
relationships they have more meaning in
life they're less at risk for things
like depression and loneliness if you go
further than just sort of that kind of
epidemiology and you look at how
movement affects the brain and how
movement affects mental health
it's as if humans were born to move and
when we are physically active it puts us
in a state of not just body but of mind
to be the best version of ourselves you
know everything from the neurochemistry
of the runner's high which makes us
enjoy cooperating with other people more
and gives us hope and optimism
all the way to how if you are regularly
active you have a different brain and
nervous system than people who don't
exercise you have a brain and a nervous
system that are more sensitive to
pleasure and more resilient to stress i
could literally just talk for the next
hour listing the many ways but i think
that the biggest takeaway is that
that human beings as individuals and as
a species we thrive when we are active
that that our brains aren't just housed
in bodies like it's a suitcase that's
carrying our brains around our brains
really work best when we are in bodies
that are active you actually talk about
in the book how it's quite possible that
the very reason we developed large
brains was to move give us some of the
science behind that one thing that i
found in my own life was once i could
understand the biological mechanisms
once i knew why things were the way that
they were it became easier not to be a
slave to it that then i sort of
understood my sense of agency within
the meat suit as it were
so
where does the hypothesis that our
brains were created to move us come from
yeah this is i mean this is an idea that
i feel like you can't even explain it
this is an idea that
if you look at the the structure and the
function of the brain everything that
humans do other than think is a form of
movement you know communicating language
emotion expressions
labor finding food celebration
procreation it's all a physical action
and the idea is basically
other than think and ruminate and plan
that's you know that there is no other
reason
to have a brain except to interact with
the world and even like thinking is
subservient to our ability to engage
with the world and so basically we have
a brain that scaffold every type of
interaction we have with the world which
is movement
and i think it's it's not even like a
fancy idea it's it that just is true
so talk to me i don't experience the
runners high so i work out every day
because i recognize its importance
but i think i recognize it largely
intellectually
especially because i've been doing it
now for so many years so i don't take a
lot of time off from it so i don't have
sort of really a lot to compare to my
wife though gets a pretty powerful
runner's high if she's stressed out she
needs to work out whereas if i'm
stressed out i'd actually rather take
time off and i find that gives me time
to sort of settle my mind settle my
nervous system so
what is it that's going on
physiologically that makes like the the
connections between
anxiety depression working out cognitive
optimization the book that john ratey
wrote spark going into like if you have
like your hardest class you should do
physical education right before and get
your heart rate up what is going on
physiologically that makes that true oh
my gosh okay so much but first i want to
ask you you said you don't get a
runner's high what do you actually do
what's your favorite format well i have
run so i did cross country for four
years so when i say like i gave it a
shot yeah like i don't run so i'm not
i'm not here to make anyone run i don't
get runner's high either unless there's
a killer soundtrack but even then like
why not just dance that is super
interesting and i'm very surprised we
will definitely want to get an answer
for that so
uh the exercise that i do is largely
just weight-based so i do some
bodyweight stuff but primarily i'm
trying to lift heavy-ish weights i'm not
like the strongest cat ever but that's
that's my zone so it's interesting so if
you want to look for a classic runner's
high
the type of movement that is most likely
to trigger it is when you are persisting
at something that is like a cardio
respiratory activity like walking fast
hiking running swimming cycling dancing
and um
my guess is that so we know that there
are individual differences in whether
people experience that as euphoria
versus that might be like you know the
classic runner's high versus
more just a sense of empowerment
something that feels more like a relief
so a lot of it's an individual
difference a lot of times i think we're
promised the euphoria that's like an
amazing drug rush a lot of people don't
get that version of the runner's high
but most people like i don't actually
know that there's any evidence that
people don't get any version of the
runner's high
we know that that human beings and also
other social species like dogs
when they engage in cardiovascular
activity for about 20 minutes or so
moderate intensity one of the changes
that you see in the brain is an increase
in endocannabinoids which is the
neurotransmitter that cannabis mimics
and if you work really hard you can get
also an endorphin rush or if you have a
killer playlist you can get an endorphin
rush or if you're moving with people
that you love you can get an extra
endorphin rush but the core high
actually isn't endorphins it's
endocannabinoids so some people
experience that as a kind of euphoria
but a lot of people experience it as
just feeling better like the worries are
a little bit less everything feels
possible things feel like
there's reason to hope endocannabinoids
also increase the pleasure we get from
social contact so sometimes you don't
even notice what the runner's high is or
the exercise high is until afterwards
and then you reunite with your partner
or you meet up with your team
and suddenly it's just it's an easier
interaction somehow their stories are
funnier and it feels better to hug
someone so the runner's high it's not
always that rush that people think it is
we're like in the moment peak intensity
you're like loving life because you're
working hard the actual runner's high is
more of this
this neurochemical change that seems to
make us more optimistic and also more
open to connecting with others
and my guess is you might get a version
of that but also the movement the
exercise that you're doing is probably
going to affect your brain and your
mental health in slightly different ways
so we know for example when you are
lifting
heavy weights you're doing things that
really engage the core
the muscles of your core
actually talk to your brain in a way
that tends to rather produce this kind
of happiness or euphoria that actually
calms down anxiety it's a really
interesting neurofeedback loop that when
you brace your core and when you're
engaging in that kind of strong muscular
contraction that's stabilizing
your brain reads those signals from your
body as essentially i've got this i'm in
control so that's not really like a
runner's high but it can be a really
empowering state of mind and so your
your literal moment-to-moment sense of
self is always being informed by what
your body is doing and we know that when
people are active often they experience
themselves as a different version of
themselves so with something like weight
lifting you are literally getting
feedback sensory feedback from your body
that says i am strong i move heavy
things i do hard things i'm powerful and
your brain does not receive that
information from like
so you're lifting something heavy so
your your brain is going to get feedback
from muscle contraction and tension of
the tendons on your joints your brain
does not get that information and think
my bicep is strong or you know my my
lats are strong the brain thinks
i am strong i have strength i am
exerting myself in this way and every
movement form has its own like signature
proprioceptive feedback so my favorite
form of exercise
my favorite forms are are dance and yoga
and when you think about the gestures
and dance or the the gestures in yoga
the full body gestures
my favorite proprioceptive feedback are
actually these physical signatures of
joy like your arms stretched out and
your gaze lifted and your heart open and
i can start a movement experience
feeling depressed and anxious and
demoralized but after you know 10
minutes of throwing my arms in the air
and looking up and smiling
my body is like
you are joy
my brain is like you are a joy and so
often people get attracted to the forms
of movement that give them a sense of
self that is really personally
meaningful or empowering and you know
with running sometimes it's i'm free i'm
fast i'm going somewhere
you're onto something insanely powerful
that i've never been able to put words
to
and i was saying this to somebody not
long ago and i was like okay so i grew
up in a morbidly obese family
i used to be 60 pounds heavier and
when i got lean for the first time was
really the first time in my life that
i've been lean but i'd already been
working out for a while so as i got lean
i was i was literally hard bodied
and there is something so
psychologically rewarding this is going
to sound weird but this is so [__]
true i stand by this there is something
so psychologically rewarding about like
reaching across your body and you hit
your pec or something you're like jesus
that's hard or you slap your abs i was
just doing this this morning
and my abs are hard and i was like
it it sounds dumb to say it to somebody
but it's [__] awesome like there is
some weird feedback loop in your brain
where i'm like i don't even know why
this is so awesome but my some
subconscious part of me
while i didn't
think i was a bad person when i was
heavier or anything like that but i was
not getting a positive reinforcement
loop from encountering my own body in
the way that and i'm talking like you're
not even thinking about i'm not talking
about looking in the mirror i'm talking
about when you feel like when you feel a
t-shirt tight across your arm when you
flex your arm that there's some signal
that gets sent when you bump yourself in
whoa it's like that was unexpectedly
hard there's
there is something really powerful in
that and and what you're describing is
exactly what i get in the gym i am
strong i remember so
again i'm not setting any strength
records but my uh highest deadlift was i
think 385 pounds
and i thought i [__] bent over and
picked up almost 400 pounds like that's
crazy and when you start thinking about
stuff like that and you're putting in
that energy and you see that reward and
your body is changing
the amount that it changes your mind is
yeah crazy well you know in my book i
write about that a woman
who
she actually had a plan to take her own
life and she went to the gym
and she deadlifted a personal best and
was literally in the moment of sensing
her own strength that she decided she
want she wanted to live
and i think that so often movement can
give us these these moments of feeling
what is possible
in yourself and for yourself through
this very concrete way you know i one of
the ways that i've experienced that
i've had a lifelong fear of flying i
hate flying and for years i refused to
fly
and when i decided that i finally wanted
to face that fear
i knew i had to learn how to deal with
how i feel on a plane like my heart
pounding and i feel like i can't breathe
and i feel like i'm trapped
and i thought like when because i
couldn't practice by getting on a plane
that's too much
that when else have i ever felt that way
and i realized that one time i'd been to
a indoor cycling class
i hated it i felt like i was trapped i
couldn't breathe my heart was pounding i
wanted to escape but i felt like the
instructor locked the doors and there
was no way to get out of the room so i
started going to indoor cycling classes
as a way to practice
um getting used to what it feels like to
be on a plane to feel trapped and afraid
and what was so
crazy about it to me is first of all it
worked right i learned how to tolerate
that discomfort i learned i can have a
voice in my head that says you can't
handle this you need to escape and at
the very same time that voice was in my
head i could have the experience of
choosing to stay like no you decided to
do this and so there's room for this
voice in your head and also staying and
i learned to tolerate the the sensations
of discomfort
but something weird happened where
because the playlist like listening to
empowering music
that i started to sense the sensations
differently and i started to have an
experience when my heart was pounding a
feeling not afraid of like feeling brave
and feeling badass
and somehow my brain like reorganized
how it experienced the physical
sensations of fear
so that in moments when i actually was
afraid suddenly i was like
i guess i'm brave i guess i'm a badass
and it's so movement is so amazing and
that how it gives us access to
to the physical feedback that allows us
to have this different sense of self and
again i'm always encouraging people to
figure out what's that movement for you
because this isn't about you know
believing everyone should exercise in a
certain way to achieve some sort of
ideal health and certainly not some sort
of like ideal
appearance but that
every form of movement has its own
empowering effects on your mind and
often it's a matching process to figure
out what that is yeah what you were
saying about bravery i think is so
important so jordan peterson has a whole
thing so he was a is i guess still a
clinical psychologist and so has tons of
patience and he would deal with people
with severe phobias and he said that
when you do um
immersion therapy he said you're not
making it less scary for them what
you're teaching them is that courage and
bravery are powerful and that they're
more powerful than fear and so the
physiological symptoms may not even
change for them but their framing around
that does and i know you've talked a lot
about the importance of framing and the
way that you see something
how do you see that play out in people's
lives what's the importance around
framing um are there other ways that you
encourage people to do that yeah i mean
absolutely so
you know the idea that you just
expressed actually is i think one of the
core principles of everything i've ever
tried to teach people which is that you
can have an inner experience that is
telling you you must do one thing or you
can't do this other thing
and you can at the same time choose
something that's consistent with your
values i mean certainly exposure therapy
is like a very advanced version of that
where some part of you wants to be able
to
go out in public or to talk to someone
and
overwhelming anxiety says this is you
can't do it and most people choose to
try to control their inner experience
rather than choose the action that's
most consistent with their values and
their goals
so you know this is true whether we're
trying to overcome addiction whether we
are choosing to stay alive when their
voices in our head that are severely
depressed and taunting us
whether we're choosing to overcome
anxiety
that that often the one skill you need
is to say i can't always control my
inner experiences but i can make a
choice right now that i know my future
self will be grateful for
that reflects my core values and i'm
going to learn how to tolerate this
inner experience
and that's true for stress it can be
also true for pain you know i'm someone
who is in pain most of the time because
i have chronic pain
and that was the very first thing that
pain taught me is
you can choose to do things in a
physical or psychological circumstance
that is less than ideal
but you can make room for everything
that's going on inside of you and still
engage with life so you know this is
that is literally the theme of
everything that i try to share with
people and you can learn it through
therapy you can learn it through
meditation which is often just one big
giant you're sitting with things in your
your mind and your body that you don't
want to deal with
and
you definitely learn it through exercise
because so much of exercise is actually
learning a new way to not only deal with
physical discomfort because i mean
exercise is hard i'm not one of those
people who says you know you don't
really need to exercise you can just do
the easy thing like don't you don't have
to sweat you can just you know stand up
and stretch and you're done like no you
the more intense probably the better for
every aspect of you and so you're going
to be uncomfortable you're going to get
tired there's going to be a voice in
your head that says you have to stop
you know there will literally be
feedback from your muscles that say you
should stop
and you learn how to
how to negotiate and figure out what
matters most to you and push through
that
okay there's a couple things in there
that i want to talk about
you've spoken very eloquently about pain
yoga for pain management
one
what is it that drives the chronic pain
that you've had to deal with and two how
do you deal with it mentally and
physically yeah wouldn't it be nice to
know
so
um
i had no answer for you in terms of what
the pain is
um you know i started experiencing
really debilitating headaches as far
back as i have a memory of being alive
so i don't know when it started you know
in my family history i there was always
oh kelly has her headache now she's
lying under a blanket and is your sister
identical twins
she she does not have the type of pain i
have she developed migraines um
after a traumatic brain injury but for
whatever reason growing up you know she
she did not share that particular aspect
of my nervous system
and uh you know it's sort of hard to
explain but the way i usually try to
explain it to people is
i understand that most people when they
wake up in the morning if they just keep
going they get hungry and they get tired
i
get pain like in the same way that
that's just what my nervous system
produces and so it'll often start with a
mild headache and then there's face pain
and then there's like things stabbing me
in the eye and it's just it's all often
up here sometimes systemic
um and
none of the so some people who have
chronic pain dedicate their lives to
figuring it out and fixing it
and nobody ever talked to no specialist
ever had a
explanation for it or a treatment that
made sense to me
so i have chosen just to live with it
and to take care of myself in ways that
i know
make it sustainable
and it's funny that my biggest trigger
for pain is actually talking there's
something about
yeah i know right because i'm a teacher
and a speaker
and um
the most fulfilling activities in my
life often are through interaction and
communication
so
i had to make a choice very early on
that said
i was going to
choose the thing professionally that i
found the most value in and the most
immediate value like maybe i helped
someone today like i taught a class and
i someone said something afterwards like
that was valuable i know it was valuable
and know that i will go home and feel
like i was run over by a truck every
time and just to choose that and be like
that's that's the cycle that i can live
with
um
and uh you know it goes back to that
idea that you can choose your values
over trying to control your inner
experiences so i basically abandoned
trying to
figure it out or i think like the last
time i went to a doctor for it was like
2014 or 2015. you just gave me the
chills i knew you were gonna say values
there and that was the other thing that
i wanted to talk to you about so
um
what is it like you you talk about
values i think really interestingly
maybe more than most people i've
encountered in my life and i think
values are so important so
why are values important to you how do
you come up with them you tell people
they should have core values like
why
i values are
i mean they are
i i think this is true for everyone but
i don't know they're the thing that that
gives you direction
that give you courage um i will say that
you know everyone has individual
personality strengths i think one of my
greatest personality strengths is a
really strong
gut response when things are value
consistent or inconsistent
like i don't realize it you know a week
later a year later like maybe that
wasn't really consistent with my values
it like assaults me the sense that like
you know this is um
that this is or it excites me like i
feel like literally when something's
value is consistent there's like a hook
on my heart and i get hooked and pulled
forward and that it it gives me the
energy or gives me the courage
it's not what other people value you for
so it's not like what's valuable about
you it's not are you smart are you you
know whatever it's um
when you are engaged in that
activity or role or you are offering
something to the world or bringing
something to a relationship
or you
you are
demonstrating a particular strength or
virtue
you feel
there's just a natural reward for it
it's like you are in alignment and i
think that
when people
reflect on the moments they feel most
alive and most proud of themselves or
most connected to something bigger than
themselves
you can start to identify this is the
role this is the relationship this is
the
the priority this is the way of being
and you know so one of my values is
enthusiasm which is a value that
like not even a lot of other people
value it and do you mean to be
enthusiastic yes
to to live in enthusiasm to be unafraid
to be enthusiastic whether i'm being
like a fan at a concert like oh my god
there's todrick hall it was just like
last week
like just to be so sincerely
enthusiastic
to um
to share in other people's joy to like
to be able to catch other people's joy
um to love what i love
and that that is something i know
it sustains me and lights me up and it
gives other people permission to also
like to
freely be a fan or freely share enjoy or
freely celebrate things that maybe are
not important but that just make you
happy
um so that's a core value for me and i
feel like there are things like that too
like the values don't have to be things
that are virtues you know like honesty
is my value i try to be honest but i
don't wake up in the morning and think
today i bring honesty to the world you
know i think today i'm bringing
enthusiasm today i'm going to bring
compassion as another core value
today i a value i've been working with a
lot lately is local community
and i realized that that was a value
when i didn't have much of it and i was
doing so much travel that i was losing
contact with like actual people i live
near
that kind of neighborhood
type of community connection so
sometimes you know what your values are
because it's that thing that you long
for you're like like
there's something missing and that can
be value too and you can choose it
without feeling like you're already good
at it i mean you know the value doesn't
have to be the thing that comes easy
courage is another one of my values
because my default temperament is fear
and dread so work hard on the courage
aspect that's amazing
compassion
self-compassion
you
teach
people how to do that yeah how did that
become a thing how do you teach somebody
to be more compassionate
and then
what's easier
teaching someone to be compassionate or
self-compassionate
oh okay such good questions so let's
define compassion so this is this is my
area of research for the past decade or
so and the kind of like the scientific
working definition of compassion
is that it is a response to suffering
so you become aware of some pain or
suffering and there's a part of you that
is moved by that sometimes like upset
about it distressed by it touched by it
and there's another part of you that
thinks
i can do something to relieve the
suffering i want to do something to
relieve the suffering and so you respond
in some way whether it's through
listening or taking action or standing
up for someone so it's the cycle of
responding to suffering
and often like ideally
it includes a sense of
of hope and empowerment a sense of maybe
love there's also a kind of a warm glow
to it so it's not
it's not a response to suffering that's
fueled primarily by anger it's not a
response to suffering that's fueled
primarily by empathic distress like oh
my gosh you're sad i can't handle that i
don't like sadness let me cheer you up
so i don't have to have this sadness
infection
that's not compassion right it's it's a
response to suffering that's driven by
an actual desire to see that that
suffering relieved and
taking some kind of joy or meaning in
that in that act of trying of responding
so
the way that you
teach people compassion is first of all
to recognize this is a basic human
instinct
and even people who get diagnosed as
being sociopaths
often have compassion it's just a narrow
circle right so so pretty much all human
beings have the capacity it's what
caregiving is rooted in you know so a
caregiver and their child or their pet
or there's this instinctive response you
see them suffering and you want to scoop
them up and protect them and take care
of them
so this is a basic human instinct and
teaching compassion is often about
figuring out where in the process
you are you're shutting down or being
less effective
so for some people the teaching of
compassion
is about the awareness aspect like maybe
you you are aware when your partner or
your child is suffering but there's a
kind of a like a compassion blindness
like you don't really see the suffering
in the people you work with because
you're so focused on yourself or it's
hard to understand the the life
experiences of people who are different
from you so you don't really see their
suffering so for a lot of people the
teaching of compassion is this kind of
cognitive empathy like you you actually
have to learn to pay attention and to
imagine what it's like to be other
people and to ask people about their
experiences so that can be one aspect of
what it means to teach compassion it's
like literally wake up and learn to see
more clearly
for other people they're like
overwhelmed by the suffering they see it
all they feel it all and where they fall
down is being overwhelmed by that i see
all the suffering in the world
and then i just feel powerless or
overwhelmed or
i feel like that that suffering is so
contagious that now i just need to
escape it
and so the strength that needs to be
developed is that actually the strength
that we were talking about earlier to
tolerate that initial distress so that
you can choose action rather than being
overwhelmed by it
for other people it's about training the
resources like you want to be
compassionate but no one ever really
demonstrated to you what it's like to
listen to someone and so you actually
train in listening or maybe you need
actual skills to train people to listen
yeah because their first instinct is
just going to be to be quiet yes and
point their eyes at the person well
that's not a bad that is let me see okay
having done it that is actually not most
people's first instinct most people
listen with their mouths
they will immediately jump in and try to
um so they they set out to listen and
they want to share and
problem solve and talk back because
that's one of the ways that we connect
but actually the very first listening
exercise that i teach in my compassion
trainings i call it listening with your
heart
and it would be like if we were doing a
partner exercise so let's say the
exercise is to share what brought you to
this training
so you do your little reflection you
know what you're ready to share you
partner up and then
first of all i always ask who typically
talks first and make them the listener
first to really get in your mindset that
actually the most because these are
people that know each other no no
usually not at all no so how would they
know who talks more it's not so not
comparison like are you the type of
person who would usually volunteer to
talk are you like like you've been in
this room for 10 minutes and you haven't
said it yet and really you're thinking
that ratio is wrong there are people who
know
and then i guide the listener in this
contemplation you close your eyes
and you bring attention to your physical
heart
not particularly woo about this but
literally there's a heart
in your body that is beating you bring
your attention to it you sense your
lungs on either side of your heart and
you just imagine you're breathing in and
out of your heart start to bring some
awareness down there
and then usually people can feel that
and then i ask them to imagine that they
are dropping their ears to where their
lungs are it's just it's a visualization
just imagine
your ears are where your lungs are on
either side of your heart
you imagine dropping your eyes down
there so you've got like your nostril
your ears
and your your eyes
here
and you do not move your mouth we are
listening from the heart
and you listen with your whole body and
so you turn your attention to the person
who's sharing and when you are listening
with your whole body often your body
language is open
your eye contact is not particularly
aggressive
and you literally imagine that you're
breathing in what the other person is
sharing
and you just let it land without having
to respond
and you set the intention to understand
the other person's experience
with the assumption that there's nothing
you ever have to do or say back like
that's the first training we do and
actually we don't let people respond in
the first exercise you literally aren't
allowed when we make it more advanced we
do things like reflective listening
where you you share what you heard very
close to the language they used and then
the next level of appreciative listening
where you say what really resonated with
you and you you put yourself a little
bit more into the conversation that's an
advanced skill
um
but that that idea you know how you
train listening is you have to change
your mindset that it's about
understanding it's not
the point where you're waiting to jump
in
and uh anyways
but we could talk so now i'm going to be
quiet because i could like go through
the whole compassion training program
well i really want to get to the
self-compassion i think that's something
that a lot of people in my audience
struggle with is yes how to you know
feel out of maybe forgiveness i'm not
sure in fact that's part of what i'm
super curious to know like when you say
to be self-compassionate what do you
mean what do you get people to focus on
is it dropping their eyes and ears down
in their own heart or is it something
completely different so
you asked which was harder first of all
self-compassion is definitely harder for
most people and it is harder to teach
because it's harder for most people and
i think about this from an evolutionary
point of view
compassion as an instinct is connected
to the caregiving system
it exists to help us respond to
suffering that is outside of ourselves
compassion does not function sort of
ideally and naturally when
we have to be the object of it and the
source of it that is not what compassion
exists for that doesn't mean you
shouldn't have compassion for yourself
but you know i think of all emotions and
these capacities we have they are there
for a purpose and compassion is for
responding to the suffering of others
and we have other very powerful
instincts that compete with compassion
when the suffering is our own shame is
one
sadness is one depression
anger
worry and anxiety and these are
you know strong evolutionarily adaptive
emotions
that motivate us to actually seek
perhaps the help of others
or to sometimes to withdraw and try to
figure things out
but they themselves often produce
a lot of suffering
and can keep us from being really
effective and so
the first step is is deciding that you
are worthy of compassion that you
deserve compassion how do you get people
to do that
well
i often do it sideways so
there's a step in our compassion
training
called common humanity which is about
recognizing
what all human beings have in common
which is the desire to be happy the
desire to be loved the desire to
contribute
and the
constant experience that falls short
from that that we all know physical pain
we all know disappointment we all know
rejection we all know anger we all know
fear
and usually if people have through their
own experiences you know maybe a
difficult childhood a traumatic
relationship
that they've come to the conclusion
that they can't trust others or that
they aren't worthy of compassion
often the
the
first intuition is you have to go in and
fix that at like the u level let me tell
you why you are worthy let me create a
story about you
but actually the thing that breaks it
open for most people
you already know that you're human and
when you come to recognize that all
humans suffer and all humans are trying
to be happy and everything that people
do is an expression of that even if it's
not skillful
that that often breaks the heart open in
a way that's more powerful than like
some sort of therapy conversation about
why you specifically are deserving
that's really interesting so um i do
this thing called impact theory
university talk about mindset people fly
me all over the place to talk about
building businesses and stuff and one
thing that i'm always coming back to is
self-worth is where people are really
tripping themselves up and so
because i went through this and my big
problem was i could and this is like i'm
not being humble this this is
everything's a bell curve and i know
where i fall on the intellectual bell
curve and i always saw myself as just
smart enough to realize how much smarter
some people are and the people that
really went on to do extraordinary
things it was like i am
smart enough to be aware of my
inadequacies and that always felt like
this really gnarly trap
and that seems like a pretty good place
to be actually but i mean we don't need
to when i was when i was young it was
not but you're absolutely right it ends
up paying off dividends once i
cobbled together the the sort of
following insight which is exactly what
you were saying which is
once i realized that the average human
is the ultimate adaptation machine and
the very thing that we are
evolutionarily designed to do is grow
and change right so culture stacks so
it's like a horse is born a dolphin is
born it can just do its thing within
like 20 minutes
a human is not that way and so we are
designed to drink in all this culture
and so we sort of stay
you know
we have to be to your point about
caregiving we have to be taken care of
and all that so it's two different
evolutionary strategies pre-wire
everything or no allow them to absorb
but they're going to need to be taken
care of now in choosing that path of
needing to be taken care of then your
very design is to adapt to your
surroundings to your culture to
knowledge all of that stuff so i thought
okay well wait a second if that's what
humans are actually designed to do and
look i admit we're not blank slates so
some amount is hardwired let's ballpark
it at 50
50 of who we are is written in stone
there's nothing you're going to be able
to do to change it but 50 is changeable
and the
life-altering effects of changing that
50 even not skillfully as you said is
still radically transformative
so i thought okay i'm willing to accept
that i'm an average human maybe even a
little below average i actually don't
believe that about myself but i'm saying
even if you were a little bit below
average you still fall somewhere in that
bell curve the amount that you can
change
is extraordinary far better to focus on
that so i always tell people there's
only one belief that matters and that
belief is that you're roughly an average
human and that the average human is
designed to grow and change and so now
just invest everything into that that's
really interesting i've never heard
anybody else say that that like you just
need to anchor yourself to being average
like all humans do
this all humans have that same wants and
desires and why not have compassion for
yourself no i remember that was one of
the very first insights i had as a
psychology undergraduate i remember one
day just thinking
wow like if you don't need to be better
than other people it's just so much
easier
are you really not trying to be better
than other people i secretly am not
secretly it's my obsession yeah really
not in like a you said earlier oh god i
don't remember the exact words you used
it's not like
i
oh virtue so you said it's not when i
talk values i'm not talking about virtue
like i don't think that it makes me
better like that i'm just trying to out
play
so to me the name of the game is how
many
how much of your potential can you turn
into usable skills yeah and so that to
me is a fun game that i play with
compassion i care deeply about the other
players i am not a step on somebody's
neck to get a head kind of guy that's
not interesting to me i'd like to see
other people win but i also want to win
well you know so there are these two
human drives cooperation and competition
and i think people you know they fall on
a spectrum of which one is more
motivating i think probably the
healthiest is to have both of them being
motivating forces neither one tripping
you up too much because you can
definitely fall too much in the like
give it all away the sort of cooperation
scale but um this is you know i have an
identical twin sister as you mentioned
and this is like the one big distinction
between the two of us she's super
competitive and i just am not like i
i
the thing that drives me is did you do
something today that was of value to the
world like were you of any use or not
and i can be very hard on myself about
that if i feel like i'm not so it's not
like there's no self-criticism i'm not
comparing myself to other people or like
a hierarchy but it's very internally i
want to get back to that initial insight
that you had so for you it was a big
moment to realize i don't need to be
better than other people because growing
up your i was always told be the best be
number one um
it's really important to be better than
ever i mean you know this is from
parents who wanted me to make sure that
i was successful to growing up in a town
that that prided itself on being number
one in a lot of things
and uh
i don't know i just i thought
that was the way to be a good human and
at some point i realized it was such a
barrier to connecting with other people
and that you know i think i remember one
in one class it's such a silly little
story but i remember the professor was
like you've done so well on your exams
we want to give you the chance to not
take the final exam we know you're going
to get an eye on it we're pretty sure so
you don't have to take the exam but we
want you to tutor somebody who might not
pass this class and so whatever amount
of time you would spend studying for the
exam we want you to tutor her so that
she can pass the class and i was like
this is the most brilliant thing i've
ever heard
and at some like that it was so much fun
and they were right i would have gotten
an a but i got to put that time into
actually helping someone else who was
struggling and i feel like that was a
turning point where i started to think
like how can that be my orientation
where instead of if there's a way to
invest time where it's about me
performing well
versus
contributing
like how do i redirect the energy so
that it's not about
my performance as much as it's about my
contribution that is so interesting to
me all right there's so much about you
that's interesting all the stuff that
you write about is really intriguing
where can people find out more about you
oh my website kellymcgonigle.com and on
all the social media you know just as me
kelly mcgonagall nice
okay
so
what is ultimately the impact that you
want to have on the world
what i hope every day when i wake up
is that
something i do whether it's a dance
class that i'm teaching or it's a book
that i wrote 10 years ago
or maybe it's somebody listening to this
i hope that i think about this every day
there's somebody who right now is facing
something in their lives that they
aren't sure they can handle
and
something i did or said or wrote
gives that person a sense that a they
are not alone
and b that that they are
adequate to their own life in this
moment even if it's nothing they would
have chosen for themselves
i love that that's pretty good
guys her work spans a whole gamut of
things that i think is really intriguing
the movement stuff i think is incredible
in terms of its impact on depression
anxiety and connection which is
no one is talking about that the way
that she's talking about that
read it i think you will find it very
powerful her whole library of books are
incredibly amazing and if you haven't
seen her ted talk do yourself a favor
and if you haven't yet subscribed be
sure to do so and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
kelly that was wonderful thank you thank
you so much that was fun yeah that was
fantastic failure is just an event it's
not a characteristic and here's one of
the things that has really helped me in
that regard
i win or i learn but i never lose
i live my life by mantras i'm a pretty
simple girl like they right they